All right, so before we go on though,
let's go over a couple common
arguments you will hear against HTMX.
Aren't servers supposed
to respond with JSON?
What if I need a different view?
Why would my server ever want to
understand the representation of
the client?
Well, even before I go to part one, your
server does understand the representation
of your client because it
is responding with JSON,
it already has some understanding of how
you are communicating between the two.
You've agreed upon names of keys,
you've agreed upon types of values,
you've already made a lot of
agreements that are implicitly there.
Second, you can use accept headers.
I accept HTML or I accept JSON, and
your server can be the one that has all
the smarts to say, this is a request for
data in the format of JSON,
here is the JSON view of the same data.
You are requesting HTML,
here's the HTML view for that same data.
So, don't sleep on headers,
headers have a lot of control.
A second important thing about state,
right now the current approach is this,
the server knows the state and
produces a view into it,
JSON being the most popular transfer.
The view is then transferred across the
turtles after being created into a set of
zeros and ones.
The client decodes those zeros and ones
and turns it into some sort of object or
representation it can understand,
usually JSON pars.
It then reconciles the JavaScript state,
and then it produces HTML from that
reconciliation to be updated
somewhere within the application.
So, I mean, there's a lot of
things that can go wrong there.
HTMX is more that your server
produces a view, HTML.
The view is transferred across
the turtles via some sort of encoding.
Usually strings are already ones and
zeros, so it's pretty easy to do.
The view is then decoded and turned into
HTML and placed according to the rules on
the originating element or
the server overrides.
I said this is a slight lie,
that's because I just mentioned right now,
the server can override a couple things,
all right, you get that.
Isn't producing HTML slow?
No, it's not slow.
What is slower?
Crawling an object in which you are
discovering all the keys, concating all
the strings, going through every single
value and slowly crawling everything, or
is just doing string interpolation
with rope strings slower, faster.
I don't think you're going to see,
if anything, I think you'll see probably
a better performance with HTML
than you will with Jason.
I can't 100% confirm this, it's just that
I've never tested everything fully myself,
but at the end of the day,
producing JSON is not fast.
There was an Intel paper in 2012 or
13 that claimed that
over 60% of all server time is
spent copying data, and that is it.
And if you think about what JSON does,
it is literally the ultimate copying of
data from one format into another format.
All right, seems like HTMX is for
back-end divs,
no serious UI/UX engineer would use HTMX,
right?
I mean, I made a nice little
pretty application with it.
I mean, there is no indication into
whether the client is interactive or
not interactive with JavaScript.
There is no indication into how
much styles you do or don't use,
it's up to the person who implements it.
So, can someone use it?
Absolutely, do you have to use it?
You don't have to, you can write a web
1.0 styled website if you want to, or
you can make it really pretty.
Just don't go web three, once you go
web three, if you've jumped the shark,
now you have a whole different
website you're creating.
And so one more time, just in case
you forget, if we make this element,
HTMX will bind an onclick handler
because the default action is a click.
We can override what the action is, but
the default is an onclick
handler on the div.
When the div gets clicked,
it sends a get request to some resource.
When the server responds, the contents of
the div will be swapped out with whatever
the server responds with.
With HTMX,
aren't you going against your own advice,
making statements about
performance without testing?
With the HTML production,
that's why I said I don't know.
I just know that adding
strings together in a rope
data structure is exceedingly cheap.
Crawling an object and
all of its properties in a dynamic or
reflection-based way is expensive.
That's just long standing intuition,
probably plays a pretty good role here.
I would still test it though,
I would always test it.
Never just assume you're right
on how things are performance,
based because almost always you're wrong.
Typically, your gut dev or
your gut feel is usually wrong
when it comes to performance.
Just always test,
always measure, very simple.
What Node.js templating
engine do you recommend?
I am not really a big fan of Node.js for
server stuff.
If I were to use one,
I have no strong feelings.
I mean, there's plenty of little
templating libraries I've played around
with, they've all been fun.
I've in general not enjoyed
using React like or JSX.
I should probably say
JSX styled templating.
I find that I tend to over complicate
it with a bunch of logic piece I can.
Once you have that available path,
I tend to take that available path, and
then I find that I'm very upset about JSX.
So, it's not a React problem,
it's definitely a JSX problem.
Yeah, people really like a Bun, Elysian
and HTMX and React and Turso, right?
The BETH stack, right, that's Bun,
Elysian, Turso and HTMX.
People really like that stack,
that's by Ethan.
A super cool stack.
How is HTMX lighter on
resources than React?
So, now we're talking about
dynamic fetching of data and
all that stuff,
I would love to talk about that.
I think DAX, if you know who DAX is,
and I will be having a podcast on this.
I've spent a lot of time thinking about
JavaScript data fetching and how to do it
optimally, how to have components to find
their own data that they need, and to be
able to aggregate that into something
that can like batch and dedupe requests.
Request duplication is very,
very difficult to do.
We have a full working thing that
we used to have at Netflix and
we're moving over to a GraphQL.
But it's a very complicated process and
it's 100% not a soft process, and
I don't think it is
actually a soft process.
I would like to talk about that more, but
I think that it's gonna be a different
thing, because that's
a whole realm onto itself.